but gluten had an association with
elevated anxiety as did sugar as
sweetness
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with dr uma
nedu i am so excited to have you
i am thrilled by the very notion of what
you do which is nutritional psychiatry
which i didn't know existed but i'm
excited that it does um welcome to the
show
thank you so much tom i'm so excited to
be here and talk to you yeah this this
one really is um something that i'm
doing backflips for when i started i was
doing all mindset stuff and um i started
doing health theory this show and people
were like why is the mindset guy talking
about health and my thing is if you
don't understand that the brain and the
body are connected then you are in for a
world of hurt you've got to really
understand how to how to make those work
you're a trained psychiatrist when did
you
come along to the nutritional element
and what exactly is nutritional
psychiatry
sure so
the way that i came to this was that i
grew up in a family that was all about
love and food and nutrients and a lot of
cooking
and so it's always you know fond of food
and want to know more and but it was
also a family a physician so
i knew i was headed to medical school
and um
i always just wanted to know more about
food and when i began to have uh
conversations with patients in residency
so i sort of
brought or tapped into my background in
really raised in a household where there
was meditation mindfulness practice
understanding of the mind-body
connection
ayurvedic principles
and i didn't use those specifically but
i really brought that mindset to
practicing with my patients and i began
to say things to them like well if
you're taking this medication are you
doing any form of exercise are you doing
any kind of movement what are you doing
what are you eating
and it it grew at the interest grew and
i began to have more of that
conversation
so that existed in the way that i was
practicing but separate to that my my my
passion trip was to culinary school that
was just because i went you know because
julia child is my food here and i wanted
to be like her so uh i i wanted to learn
more and that kind of fitted together in
a cool way with everything else yeah
it's the i think your book in um some
other countries is called the food mood
connection exactly yeah so the food
connection in in the uk and a few other
countries that that to me is so
important for people to understand you
know we've got obviously depression and
anxiety been skyrocketing for decades
and originally it was like a question of
well are we just getting better at
diagnosing it but it really hasn't
changed
it seems like it really is going crazy
and what i loved about your book is
that you're you're going through some of
the disorders that you would normally
hear a psychiatrist speak about um
that's normally you know depression
anxiety ptsd ocd i mean just like the
list goes on and on um
and normally it would just always be
medication and so the fact that you give
like really specific prescriptions for
things you can eat or avoid eating
that's really really powerful
so when we talk about this stuff
beginning to
skyrocket let's get right into
specifically with anxiety so i suffered
from debilitating anxiety at one point
in my life unfortunately
for as much as i should have recognized
there was probably a huge dietary
component i came to that very late
so i understand how brutal
generalized anxiety can be
what are some of the major triggers and
then how do we begin unwinding that
sure so i think that for anxiety one of
the things i often start talking to
people about is the foods to avoid
generally i talk about a whole foods
diet and ask people to incorporate foods
rather than give them up but in anxiety
we notice there's a correlation with
gluten so you know it's always about the
source of your source of the gluten you
have if you're having a shelf-stable
loaf of bread from the supermarket that
sits on your counter for three weeks and
looks perfect you have to ask yourself
that's not that's not the bread we're
speaking of here
but gluten had an association with
elevated anxiety as did sugar as
sweetness can we get into the
biomechanism like what what is going on
why are those is is everything going to
come down to the epithelial lining of
the gut and this is a leaky gut problem
or is it something else you know the
mechanisms tend to differ and we go
through that in the different chapters
of the book but that i think that that
the overall
um major mechanism that runs through
every single diagnosis is the gut brain
axis the preponderance of inflammation
that these uh these substances drive
like sugar
and
as the leaky gut and the intestinal
permeability gets set up there's also
the dysbiosis that is happening because
the bugs are just not getting the right
foods that they need to thrive so you
have dysbiosis being set up then they're
not able to form things like the short
chain fatty acids that they need and the
butyrates to to really help the gut
thrive
so sugar is one of them artificial
sweeteners is another stevia was found
to have even though stevia and
erythritol if you are going to use the
sweetener separate to all of this may be
better options but in anxiety it was not
um processed vegetable oils i've tried
really fast before we move off of
artificial sweeteners so i have a
feeling that a big driver for my anxiety
was artificial sweeteners i was drinking
uh three large monsters a day plus
two or three diet cokes
and it helped me get lean it was amazing
because it filled me up the carbonation
and the sweetness and it allowed me to
intake a lot less calories um
but
i think that was a big part of it what
is going on what is it about either
those specifically diet sodas or
artificial sweeteners in general is what
what is the sort of dysbiotic response
sure
so so the the one of one of the things
is that there's an elevation in the
level of sweetness so a tiny packet of a
sweetener is super sweet
so in one way it's impacting your brain
because you are now
expecting this super sweet flavor
then the actual substances are gut
disruptors and the third mechanism is
that they are not and that's why i
mentioned stevia and erythritol they
have a better mechanism related to
insulin
and
so so
in addition to the brain problems that
things like artificial sweeteners set up
for us by driving anxiety they disrupt
the gut and our brain gets used to this
hyper hyper sweetened taste
because often patients will say that you
know that you know you want me to you
want me you talking to me about not
having sugar-sweetened beverages so i'm
going to have the diet soda of some kind
but what noticed is that sometimes they
want they crave more sweet
sweet foods
and often those foods are carbohydrates
so we talk about almost trying to either
heal your gut
or help your gut along so that the bugs
in your gut are working for you and not
against you and you know sugar basically
sweetness just just are doing the
opposite of what we need them to do
sugar on the other hand has an actual
there's actually an actual correlation
between depression
um several trials linking depression and
sugar intake the added sugars
and
also related to the level of anxiety so
you know sugar works in a slightly
different way in the sense that
initially you might have this you know
good feeling someone has a bowl of ice
cream and like i can't understand why my
doctor tells me not to eat this i feel
good what's wrong with her you know but
the truth is that you know over time
what happens is that if it affects you
your neurons you know the sugar is not
good for us it may make you feel
emotionally good in the moment but it's
really not good in the longer term so
you know i think
what i what i feel people have not made
the leap to tom is that we talk about
um
with nutritionists and we talk to our
doctors about you know i have a family
history of diabetes how should i be
eating but we don't link
use of nutrients or food with our
emotions and i do think that that's
that's the gap that i'm hoping to fill
with this book and
sharing the information about the stuff
to avoid okay so in our avoid list that
we just went through um specifically as
it relates to anxiety and a little bit
depression but we had
gluten can be problematic we've got
artificial sweeteners we've got sugar
what are there other sort of major
things or are those like are big to
avoid that processed vegetable for
anxiety processed vegetable oils is the
other okay so
give me an example of where that hides i
think people will be surprised how many
things have that
exactly so you know it might be that a
restaurant look they they tend to be
oils that are less expensive so in the
restaurant industry and in fast food
chains these are the oils that that they
use and reuse and it sets up a huge
level of information about it because
what changes is it flips the ratio of
our omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids and
this is not good for us because what
that does is drives inflammation in the
body here's a great example
i have a few clients who travel a lot
for work
and
contrary to what you might think during
during the pandemic they started to have
a lower level of anxiety
and we noticed this specifically and i i
was puzzling me at first and then i
realized you know just taking more and
more information and asking them i
realized that they were eating more
meals at home so even though they had
been trying to pursue a healthy diet
following the guidelines and they had
had an improvement in anxiety they had a
significant improvement by eating meals
at home because they know you know the
oils i'm going to suggest to them are
yeah extra virgin olive oil you know
avocado oil and one of the things that
people don't realize that is super
helpful in conditions like anxiety is to
up your fiber game um because fiber
fiber rich foods break down in your body
i mean i don't need to tell you this
talk break down you know in a more
complex way and more slowly so you don't
have you know think of the the sugary
doughnut and you know people have this
sugar crash and they first they have a
sugar high then they have a sugar crash
it's all about insulin bouncing all over
the place when you include simple things
like having more fiber your your
instrument is even your blood sugar is
even so people who have anxiety don't
have these highs and lows
other things about anxiety are things
we know caffeine can drive anxiety but
it's the amount of caffeine it's how
your body tolerates it it's also
caffeine withdrawal i've had people
present with extremes of anxiety because
they come in saying doctor i'm giving up
caffeine and then they have caffeine
withdrawal and they super anxious
hydration
you know
alcohol someone invites a little bit too
much alcohol on a holiday weekend and
the next day somewhat dehydrated can
present with severe anxiety hypoglycemia
is another one just you know someone who
recently in my practice was trying out a
type of fast i'm not against the type of
fasting i think it always has to be
discussed with their doctors
but didn't realize that they hit a very
low blood sugar level so they were
hypoglycemic and had panic attacks so
it's it's all it of you know we our
physiology is all interrelated you can't
do one thing without affecting something
else why would being hypoglycemic put
you into a panic attack is it so when
when i was really debilitated by anxiety
one thing that i found was if i was cold
then my anxiety would spike hard because
the physiological response to being cold
and being anxious for me are almost
identical um and so it almost put it on
my mind if that makes sense and so my
brain just didn't differentiate between
i'm cold or i'm anxious
that's a great example actually because
with hypoglycemia
people haven't have saved skipped a meal
or haven't eaten or something has
happened they dropped their blood sugar
and one of the symptoms of hypoglycemia
is sort of feeling nervous or jittery
because actually your body is craving it
needs to be fed um
and
what happens is that i've just seen
people
you know have the spike of anxiety or
panic and and what i've said to them is
you know are you eating regular meals
you know you may be taking other
medications for other conditions and and
exactly what are you doing are you
drinking enough water and it's a similar
it's i love the example you gave because
it's a similar type of thing the body
perceives it in a certain way and the
way that the brain interprets that is
i'm feeling anxious i'm feeling anxious
but actually what the body is asking for
is to be fed you know that that that
means that we need the nutrients so
yeah okay so this stuff all gets super
super complicated but when i think about
let's let's pretend for a minute that
our audience is more they're like you
they are diet agnostic so they just want
the best
when you were describing um
hypoglycemia as being a problem i
thought okay cool then would a ketogenic
diet which i'll call sort of the king of
of flatline where your just whole
relationship to food is different i your
relationship to hunger is different
because you don't go on that wild ride
because your body just dips into stored
fat and so you feel pretty even keel all
the time
is that the most
uh
anti-anxiety diet or is there something
even better
i don't think there's something even
better but what i will say is some
studies that are more recent have shown
a correlation between kindergarten
ketogenic diets and improved anxiety so
i think that if someone is following
that diet and it helps the anxiety and
they're otherwise you know under the
care of a doctor and why do i say that
because you know simple things that we
tell people to eat like grapefruit can
interact with multiple medications
through liver enzymes so i'm not saying
that globally to say oh you should
always talk to your doctor i am saying
if you if you're assuming a different
diet and you're changing things up you
know just run things by someone who
knows your overall conditions your
medical history and what you might be
taking but there's been some good
evidence so i would say if it's working
for someone and they've noticed a
lowering of anxiety definitely try it
out and have your doctor review the
literature with you
okay um
you you go through in the book a lot of
different diseases and i'm going to jump
a little bit out of order because i'm
absolutely terrified of running out of
time with you because you've got so much
great information
i want to talk about dementia and the
mind diet and what we can do to avoid
brain fog cognitive decline like you
know if
and i'll speak for myself here i
very much want to stay
crazy sharp until the day i die
so what would that sort of ideal
cognitively optimized diet look like
okay great so so um things that i like
people to embrace are starting starting
with a turmeric with black pepper
it's a spice that not only
hits the high notes in several
conditions there's a definite
association with cognition
so if it's something you cook with or
not a quarter t at least a quarter
teaspoon a day with a pinch of black
pepper paprine activates the curcumin
makes it more viable by very huge
percent to both the body and the brain
tip right there and for those people who
don't
cook with it add it to a soup or
smoothie or tea these are good options
for you
it turns out that the polyphenols and
olive oil became
a
more available when they were used in a
sofrito preparation so different
cultures have different uh types of
suffrage
what's that sofrito so frito is the
baseball it could be the base for a
gumbo it could be the base but it's
basically onions
garlic some cultures have chili pepper
it's different varieties of that but a
particular study showed that
this reaction made the polyphenols more
available
so i say you know if you're going to
cook use the use the good olive oil use
that gentle simmering temperature you
know use those ingredients because
onions garlic they they are great
prebiotic foods good for your gut
feed the good bacteria why not throw
them in um and then you know there are
also other spices um things like
cinnamon saffron rosemary ginger and
sage
that had
some good results in a good data in
association with just protecting
cognition
coffee
the the suggestion was have coffee but
have you know less than 400 milligrams a
day because depending on the size of
your cup that could be about two to
three cups have them early in the day
alcohol was not an entirely negative one
but at the same time it's all about
things in moderation and if i if someone
is drinking alcohol i generally suggest
red wine because of the reserve
resveratrol
now do you think there's a hormetic
effect to
alcohol to me alcohol is so um correct
me if i'm wrong this is my understanding
so
everyone's going to say that there's
three macronutrients fourth being
alcohol
and if if you look at the order in which
the body burns them it will prioritize
alcohol now my gut instinct is that it's
prioritizing alcohol because it's a
toxin
so
why would there be anything other than a
hormetic effect meaning for anybody
that's never heard that term um that a
little bit of bad actually gets your
body to sort of um push back against it
become more robust and stronger so it is
a toxin but in a small enough amount it
actually can be beneficial think of
working out i think that's a great point
yeah i think that's a great point i mean
i think it could well be that i i what
the studies basically showed was that
it's not that you have to exclude
alcohol it's about moderation and it's
the type of alcohol and what i always
say whether it's whether it's this area
of the book or anywhere else everything
in moderation and why do i say that term
because most individuals who come to my
practice are drinking some form of
alcohol so i would rather work with them
to use that in moderation and share tips
like you know hey if you like cocktails
you're drinking a bunch of sugar because
this is what simple syrup is it's sugar
so here's some tips about you know
making that a healthier version drinking
less of it and giving them tips to cope
with it because that's in my practice of
almost two decades now what i find is
trying to say to people don't do
something is is just
behavioral psychology has taught us
that's not the way to go so it's about
giving people some healthy options
within what they're doing and then
hopefully over time when they see the
benefit of something they start to
either tape it back or change the habit
that's very different from someone who's
struggling with alcohol obviously but
you know you also asked me about brain
fog and this is where the antioxidant
lutealin rich foods came in and and
there were studies that showed that
if you incorporate juniper berries fresh
peppermint sage thyme
certain types of hot and sweet peppers
these apparently are all luteal and rich
foods
celery seeds parsley artichokes and
dried mexican oregano
they actually helped with the brain fog
so you know i say to people if you're
struggling with that you want to kind of
sharpen things up start to in spices
you'll find throughout the book and one
of the reasons they're one of my
favorite things is that they last a long
time they salt free sugar-free
calorie-free because i'm not suggesting
a mix that has added sodium in it but
they they hit the handles on lots of
different conditions and so it's worth
stocking up on those and it turns out
that for brain fog they can certain
spices can be pretty useful
what is your take on sodium
our body needs sodium so
i think that we just have to be careful
about the amount that we consume and
where we consume it from so i think that
being aware of the added sodium and
processed foods um you know frozen
vegetables can be a great option for
people inexpensive so that they get
their vegetable boost but if it has a
sauce or an added sodium or you know
that the the added ingredients are what
throw it off so our body needs sodium
but it's it's the amount of sodium that
we consume in our diets that's usually
too high no i i'm actually completely
unaware but are there studies that um
show what happens as you increase your
sodium intake because obviously you hear
a lot about blood pressure um but i've
heard that that there's like complexity
there that people maybe aren't
acknowledging but it's not an area that
i'm super knowledgeable about but
the number of times that i've sort of
encountered sodium in the literature
i've walked away going
it's really like
not that big of a deal to be honest but
if i'm crazy
now is the time to tell me because i i
eat the most salt i think you'd be
horrified
you know a lot of people like salty food
and again it comes down to you know time
about a month ago i was treating a woman
had come in to see me for consulting she
brought her adult daughter along with
her and both they each had opposite
reactions to the same healthy food
and you know this speaks to the
uniqueness of our bodies and our
microbiome which is mostly unique so i
it would take a lot to shock me i i've
um you know i've been hardened by years
of practice but but i think it really
boils down to someone's individual
constitution if if your blood pressure
is fine if you are otherwise healthy
if you know your blood tests are okay
and your doctor is not yelling at you
for something um you know i think that
that that's what it is you know is it
good or bad uh probably not great but
you know is it having any deleterious
consequences on your body it doesn't
seem like you look great
but again it comes back to
um
you know a person following some
guidelines and that's really what the
book is about it's it's not for extremes
and it's really meant to for someone to
pick up whether it's a therapist but you
know sharing it with her client um his
uh his or her client or person just
saying listen i want to be healthy i'm
really struggling during the pandemic my
anxiety is through the roof i've never
had problems before
um you know what what can i do something
dietary adjustments as as you know from
your journey you know you can start
immediately you can start making changes
and that i feel is empowering for people
um for two reasons when a doctor says to
you here take this prescription as i
have done as well um it's it's
disempowering to someone you know you're
being told you have to do this and uh
you have this symptom and this is what
will make you better i think that that
that nutrition and food flips that ratio
and puts it puts a person into the
driver's seat of deciding hey i can make
the choice to go to fast foods today and
start to impact my gut bacteria which we
know will change within 24 hours
or i can say i'm going to aim for that
healthy salad i'm going to build it up
the way that you know
it was suggested to me i'm going to add
in those lean proteins i'm going to add
in as many colors of the rainbow as i
can to bring back healthy phytonutrients
and antioxidants for my brain
and i'm going to go in that direction
and a person can feel empowered to make
that decision now they they still may
choose the chips the ice cream and the
fast foods but that being said
that that's gonna it's gonna have the
effects down the road all right that
that's an amazing example and so i want
to dive into that so people can take all
the things you've said now and put into
how to make that choice in an informed
way so we'll get to the salad in a
minute because i really want to hear you
said to build it up in the way that i
was instructed to do so i want to know
more about what that is because i the
number of people i watch build a salad
and i think you might as well go have a
twinkie um
is is a lot uh but so fast food i'm
gonna break down why i think you would
say fast food is bad and then you tell
me if this is what you mean so
in the beginning you laid out four
things that people really want to avoid
and fast food has them all um
so one i've heard you talk about which i
didn't even know
is that french fries
at most fast food restaurants contain
sugar they contain sugar you don't taste
it but the
exactly the research and development i
was pretty shocked when i came across
this years ago that the research and
development is is immense for um to to
produce hyper palatable foods and by
that i mean this is the reason time that
you can't you know at the drive-thru you
want the bigger size and when you get
the bigger size of the fries you want to
eat all of them um you know you don't
taste the sugar but it makes the
it enhances the flavor and it makes
those foods hyper palatable
so you know sugar is a big one and
my my concept of conveying that is eat
the orange skip the strawberry orange
juice and and that's because people
think oh my doctor said oranges are good
vitamin c and the labels on the
store-bought orange you say that but
it's you know another helpful thing is
four grams of sugar is one teaspoon
because i've said before that our labels
in the united states are grams but we
cook all our recipes are standardized to
ounces and pounds so people don't know
how much sugar there is what does four
grams mean so having that simple
understanding of how to break it down
means that if they get a four ounce um
yogurt but it's fruited and it has 24
grams of sugar well would you actually
be adding that number of teaspoons to
you know plain yogurt if that's
something that you eat because certainly
the ones with active cultures and
well-sourced grass-fed milk
dairy yogurts are definitely something
if you eat there you can
you can try but you know how do those
little things at the tip of their
fingers is empowering knowing that there
are 200
names for sugar and if you look them up
or if you look at the label of something
you're buying
then there are 200 names for sugar but
but literally this is a list you can
google but when you look at a food label
always
you know these are things you can take
photographs on from your computer and
carry them with you so if you're buying
something
um you know that that's actually hiding
in sugar
another another culprit by the way is
glutamates um and monosodium glutamate
that's another one that not as many
names but it gets couched in different
ways you you talk pretty powerfully
about glutamate can you tell people why
glutamate matters and what it what sort
of disease states it impacts so
glutamates are found to really be
difficult uh for conditions like ocd
so it's one of the foods that we suggest
to people to really be cautious of
when when they have symptoms of ocd
because it can really be
it can be worsened it can be worsened by
these foods and and then there are
glutamines and glutamic acid in foods
that we're used to eating that are not
necessarily bad foods but when you know
that they contain
glutamates that you have to be careful
if you have ocd things like parmesan
cheese
you know
oyster sauce
tomato sauce miso miso is otherwise a
fermented food and super good for the
gut but if you're sensitive to
glutamates
that could be a source that could drive
ocd so it's about finding you know you
mentioned sodium and salt it's about
finding that balance for every person
and what the what that's one of the
reasons that i put in the book
a
list of food to avoid because there are
things you have to know to avoid as well
and for anyone keeping score glutamate
is the g in msg correct
yes it is
where do you come down on um
animal
protein
and it
probably makes sense to touch on red
meat as well
versus vegetarian i know that you're
agnostic and you can work with anybody
on anything yeah but in terms of coming
up with sort of the ideal um where do
you fall on those two
so you know the the so where i fall on
those two is that i think um it's about
the sourcing and it's the
quantity you know if you can get say
you're having beef grass-fed beef is
going to be important because if not in
the uh beef industry um cows uh well so
so think about when you're little and
you saw you know photographs in your in
your storybooks cows are eating grass
that's certainly what i remember well it
turns out that in the industry they
don't actually dress they eat sunglass
and but they grained off uh before
before slaughter and so the graining off
is a process that actually bulks them up
and um and and they also given different
medications and things which affects the
quality of the meat because you know we
are what we eat so
that if if the cow eats that and we eat
the cow there's that that's that chain
so that's what i mean is this is this an
omega-6 problem what is it that the cows
are getting that's one of the problems
the omega-6 the gut disruptors because
they are fed hormones they're given
certain medications for digestion and
for other reasons
in terms of how they are bred
but also the actual grain
is that that is definitely inflammatory
what i find is that of the different
diets the mediterranean eating pattern
has consistently shown the best results
for depression and anxiety give a quick
breakdown of what that is sure so then
you know it's based on the mediterranean
lifestyle and the mediterranean region
in the world and it's basically
a diet that's rich in healthy fats such
as avocado olive oil lean proteins
whether it's you know chicken or seafood
it's very heavy in safe food but good
sources of seafood
and then beans nuts legumes healthy
whole grains
you know chickpeas
those types those types of ingredients
and it's consistently shown in studies
to have helped individuals with mood and
anxiety so i think that's important for
people to know is it the perfect guide
maybe not for everyone but it's a good
guideline
because
my feeling about this time is that if
people are consuming
you know
for example there's a study that showed
that eating trans fats
is associated with aggression so once
again we come back to if you're eating
these foods
you might have problems with these
behaviors and if you are or if you get
worsening of symptoms you may want to
think about cutting back on that
um i i feel like it's a stepwise pathway
to well-being and mental well-being
because if if someone's just eating the
wrong type of diet how can i
how can i encourage them on toward a
healthier path because
i think it's hard when um you know you
either pull out your prescription pad or
you or in my version of the work i do in
nutritional psychiatry i say well you
have to eat this so i tried really not
to do that my method is really about
what is it that when you come in to see
me are the steps that i think you can
you can try and that you feel you can
commit to because if you're not going to
do them then you're just going to leave
my office it's like going to a physical
therapy appointment and not practicing
the exercises
you know your injuries
it is not it's not going to get better
so
so what are some of those early sort of
easy wins that people can do
i know that it's going to be so specific
and so i'm just sort of pitching right
to the middle of your sort of average
person that comes to see you i'm
guessing they have anxiety or they have
depression
and they're not going to want to give up
all the lovely things that they eat
so what what are some easy switches or
swaps or however you approach it
exactly so i like the prebiotic foods
because we those are easy to include
things like the alien family onions
garlic leeks
the top of my head jicama and a few
others um there's a longer list in the
book but those actually just just feed
the bugs what they need to thrive so
right there
you know i'm speaking about mental
health because that's what i care about
the most but the truth is by by
balancing your gut gut bacteria or your
gut bugs because it's not just bacteria
in a good way you're also taking care of
your immunity which is largely housed in
the gut
and you're doing your body good because
you're fighting down inflammation yes
inflammation drives mental health
diseases and mental well-being but
you're also
uh you know helping the level of
inflammation in your body so it's just a
good it's a good basic starting point
fermented foods you know kefir
miso kimchi any of those add back a
great
gut element for you
um another thing is eat the rainbow so
so why do we talk about the colors of
vegetables because by you know gamifying
it and i say to my patients how many
colors of you know vegetables can you
eat in a week or in a day or in you know
however you break it down and did you
know you know that red bell peppers have
some of the highest levels of vitamin c
and that's really good for you so so
making that um something that becomes a
pillar of what they do you know
prebiotics probiotics um the color of
the rainbow and why and telling them the
reason why this helps your gut bacteria
it reduces inflammation it adds back
antioxidants just simple pillars like
and then of course i love to go into the
spices and try to introduce them to
more interesting flavors but also good
good brain benefits i want to go into
some of the micronutrients you'd mention
at the top you've got magnesium
vitamin d which we haven't talked about
but i know that you have pretty
extensive understanding of the
importance of that
but talk to me about magnesium what what
is the importance can we get it in diet
do we need to supplement what what is
it turns out that magnesium
people are very frequently deficient in
magnesium and magnesium is associated
with high levels of depression
and high levels of anxiety so
one of the things i will do is if
someone comes in with those symptoms i
will check a magnesium level but it's an
easy thing to replenish and if someone
is super anxious it's best to try out
supplementing it while they also up
their game in terms of their diet and in
chapter 11 of the book that's why we
broke down
[Music]
you know nutrients and then foods that
you can find it so it's an easy
reference say that you find you're
deficient in magnesium or you're feeling
anxious it's an easy thing to start to
increase in your diet as well
yeah oh in fact there's we have to close
the loop on that salad thing so
salads are something that when i think
of okay eat the rainbow amazing advice
putting all this stuff together
but then you can ruin it depending on
what sauce you put on it or what are
some of the things so somebody that i um
i know well will make a salad but then
they'll put like crushed
like nacho chips in it uh and so they do
things that is like
you were doing good right until the end
um what should a salad look like
so
um a few things i'm laughing because
it's so true you know in this country
like we think oh i'm gonna get a healthy
healthy lunch and then there's all these
toppings on them which which are like
tons of calories right there yeah and
not not calories in the good way i mean
i'm not one i'm not a big one for
counting calories i think it's much more
about the whole food but that being said
that's an excellent point we need to
kind of take a step back from the ranch
and uh figure out you know easy easier
better healthier dressings to do so i've
even taught our medical students this is
the way to make a vinaigrette you know
uh i have healthy fats an acid that you
like you know salt pepper shake it in a
mason jar because it's going to save
your money it doesn't have all that
added sodium and preservatives that and
stabilizes that as a salad dressing and
sugar that salad dressings have
i start with a mixture of greens i try
to have people eat a diversity of greens
because the folate
has been there's a particular bacteria
that has actually been shown to be super
helpful um in in terms of folate so
there's a reason that i ask people to
add to add more greens to their diet and
i even like people to add things like
herbs like parsley um it's another green
to your diet you know
things that diversify the flavor make it
interesting to your dandelion greens
you know
cut up some bok choy into your your
salad it's not it doesn't have to just
be lettuce spinach is a great option
um and then the colors the i like to go
for colors and texture so colors are all
the types of sweet and sweet peppers
bell peppers
are great for you and cucumbers you know
super low calorie vegetable great crunch
good flavor all of these have vitamins
so think about the nutrients and
vitamins that you're bringing back and i
like um radicchio you know different
color different texture different taste
i love arugula for that peppery peppery
bite and and then nuts nuts and seeds
adding in you know chickpeas
great source of plant-based protein
and we're talking you know quarter cup
for the whole salad
you can throw in black beans you can
throw in white beans you you can build
it up even a simple thing if you don't
want to make a vinaigrette a squeeze of
lemon
salt pepper and some lemon zest on the
salad is is delicious um the other herb
i love to add is basil so you know the
more that you can kind of build a salad
i had
practiced this one once and actually
more than once a different patient so
the one that i remember is how much
how much it helped her diabetes and i'll
explain why
she was eating she was taking meals to
work but she was taking
relatively unhealthy meals that were not
filling it was impacting her blood sugar
her dexcom monitor kept going off
she was then reaching for unhealthy
snacks at work um her break room had you
know peanut butter crackers or something
and she'd grab that because she knew her
blood sugar was was lower
but by just by adding in a healthy
wholesome salad she would actually you
know she'd call me up the next week and
she said i'm so full every day at lunch
that i'm feeling so much better just
from green you know greens and what i'm
describing it wasn't anything and she
might add a little bit of chicken
sometimes she added a small piece of
salmon but she really was eating through
those greens stabilizing her blood sugar
feeling better she lost weight not
within a week that took time but
it there's a lot to be said for the
filling ingredients which are fiber rich
which are bringing back those positive
ingredients so you know i i kind of
laughed to myself in some roles as if i
say salad but but i'm saying it for many
other different reasons um and for
important reasons related to brain
health
what made me rethink about the salad
thing is just the notion of
micronutrients and making sure that
you're getting sort of this wide array
of things are there um is there a basic
suite of supplements or anything you
recommend
my entire life i basically tried to
avoid it so um d3 is sort of the only
thing that i've ever consistently
supplemented with
i have recently started doing magnesium
in k2
but is there anything else is there a
suite of things that you just know the
average person isn't getting enough of
so you know i think it depends on the
symptom i think magnesium many people
are deficient in but again
being a doctor i'm going to say have it
level checked because that's a
scientific way of us knowing whether
you're deficient or not
i think d3 is is a good safe thing to do
because many of us are deficient
especially depending on the part of
their country and i live in the
northeast and i know many of us are
deficient
and i think that with others relating to
the mental health symptoms for example
take saffron so saffron is um has a
significant number of evidence for
improvement of depression but it's a
very expensive spice
you use a tiny you know a few threads
and say biryani or a risotto or paella
so it's not necessarily going to convert
to the type of dosing you need that
might be an appropriate place where we
can get a supplement
your book is full of so many things we i
mean we haven't even touched on like
half the disease states that you go into
this this is incredibly incredibly
powerful information where can people
find the book where can they learn more
about you where can they really drink
deeply of your wisdom
thank you so much tom so they can find
me on social media at dr uma naidu which
is at
d-r-u-m-a-n-a-i-d-o-o
and we're always putting out new and
updated information on social media
especially instagram and tweeting
we try to share studies that are recent
and things like that and
my website is uma naidu md.com that's
u-m-a-n-a-i-d-o-o-m-d.com
and that will link you to where you can
purchase the book but you can also get
it at your local bookstore or wherever
books are sold
amazing thank you so much for coming on
the show guys this stuff is important
food and mood being connected like
there's just no question about it thank
you so much for coming on today by the
way if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential